so welcome to the lecture on fundamental of
vibrations so this is an introductory lecture
let us discuss what is vibration as from the
mechanical engineering aspects we will discuss
the vibration
so in general vibration is an oscillatory
motion and it means that a motion that repeats
itself after some interval of time so usually
mechanical systems or mechanical components
they are subjected to the repetitive motion
i mean they repeat their motions so vibration
usually occurs in mechanical systems because
they are subjected to some forces and they
are they have disturbed from their equilibrium
positions so they start vibrating
so vibration is type of oscillation a repetitive
motion and these oscillations can be periodic
as well as random so for example periodic
so periodic like if there is a motion of a
pendulum periodic means it has a fixed interval
of time after which it repeats its motion
and when it is random means there is no any
fixed interval when it will repeat so periodic
motion is the motion of a pendulum or the
motion of a shaft due to unbalanced masses
however the random motions when we have a
vehicle that is passing on the road way and
due to the road profile because the road profile
is irregular so due to the effect of that
road profile the motion of the vehicle or
automobile that is random
so here we can see that so i say that there
is a pendulum and it is moving about some
equilibrium point so equilibrium position
is the position at rest when we leave the
pendulum it will rest in this position however
when it vibrates it will vibrate at this position
and it may have a theta this degree of freedom
similarly we have here you can see some profile
of the displacement and time plot
so we can see here this triangular profile
it means this motion is going to repeat this
triangle is going to repeat itself after a
fixed interval of time so this time is fixed
so this is the time that is fixed and therefore
it is periodic similarly here this profile
this motion is going to fix and that repeats
after this fixed time and that therefore it
is periodic motion similarly here we have
a repetition of this wave profile it repeats
from here and then again it start repeating
its motion
these are periodic but if you see this motion
there is no any fixed time interval when it
will repeat itself it is random motion so
for example there is the wind forces and therefore
the vibration of a tower due to this wind
forces so these are the random vibration signals
so now the next question is why mechanical
system vibrates why there is vibration of
mechanical systems why don’t they are static
so as we know that every mechanical system
has some mass and stiffness so any system
that has some mass and stiffness that is prone
to vibrations moreover the mechanical systems
they are subjected to external forces as well
as some forces that are generated inside the
system
for example if there is some internal combustion
engine there are some unbalanced forces that
are generated inside the system and due to
the effect of those forces the system will
vibrate and there are several external excitation
forces for example there are earthquakes there
are wind there are water waves so for example
there is a boat or ship in the water in the
sea or in the canal or river due to the waves
because waves are external force and when
they are applied on a system that has some
stiffness and every mechanical system has
some stiffness and mass
and whenever that forces are applied on the
system they make them vibrate
in mechanical systems there are some looseness
between because there are connections between
the two members and when there is some weak
connections loose connections so
that can cause vibrations
for example we can see here so here are some
clearance so this is the bearings and the
shaft if there is more clearance or here are
the bolts that are supporting this motor that
are connecting to the support of this motor
if they are loose or more clearance is there
there will be more vibrations and there are
some mechanical systems like vibrating pumps
vibrating motors the belts belt and pulley
drives then vibrates the fan
so these rotary systems they may have some
eccentric masses they have some unbalanced
masses and due to that unbalance they may
have some vibrations
so what is the effect of vibration now we
have defined vibration we have defined the
causes of vibration now we are to know what
is the effect of vibration the effect is positive
or negative so in general in mechanical systems
in several applications we avoid or we do
not want vibrations for example if we are
in a train we are in automobiles we are in
bus we do not want vibrations because the
vibration causes discomfort to the passengers
if we have some turbines there are plates
and rotors the vibration can cause fatigue
and failure of the turbine plates turbine
rotors components and if there is some machine
that is on some support and there is some
vibration of the machine the vibration will
transmit from that machine to the support
and usually the support are on the floor and
so the floor can vibrate and the people on
the floor can feel that vibration
and they can feel uncomfort uneasiness of
the vibration due to vibration moreover due
to the vibration there could be rapid wear
of certain components like bearings and gears
and due to that there could be generation
of noise also so we can see we can see that
in mechanical systems usually we are avoiding
the vibration because vibration is going to
have some harmful effects
so we can see here they can a vibration can
make the fasteners loose and if there is some
vibration in the machine of the for example
if it is cutting lathe machine ok so the tool
can chatter and due to the vibration of the
tool the we cannot achieve the required surface
finish on the product that is machined so
here we can see the two examples so one is
this bridge and that is failed down due to
that is collapsed due to the wind excitations
as i said that the structure or systems they
are subjected to wind loads and due to that
they can vibrate and that vibration can lead
because the theory of vibration is very vast
and you will understand that in certain condition
this vibration can lead to the failure of
this phase and here in turbine blades there
could be the failure after wind blades due
to the fatigue that can be due to the vibration
so as a mechanical engineer why should you
study the vibration as we saw the examples
and we find that the vibration in mechanical
systems is undesirable we do not want vibrations
and every mechanical system has some natural
frequencies and if the force that is applied
on the system and the frequency of that force
coincides with the natural frequency of the
system there is the resonance condition and
in this condition the vibration amplitude
of the system is quite large and the system
can break and fail
and as a mechanical engineer we should study
to avoid this circumstances in any machine
and therefore we should study the vibration
we should study it why because we can remove
the causes of identify and remove the causes
of vibration in the designing stage or we
can identify in the early stage if there is
some problem of vibration we can identify
we can know why it is and we can rectify the
vibration causes
nowadays if a system is existing and there
is vibration problem and there is no any possibility
to change the design of the system then we
can design some devices that are known as
dampers or vibration mitigation measures so
we should study the vibration so that we can
design the proper vibration mitigation strategy
for a system in order to reduce the vibration
for example if we have the train movement
train motion and there is a vibration and
there is primary and secondary suspension
systems that are responsible for the reduction
of the vibrations
so we can design these suspensions properly
so that we can reduce the vibration there
are enough regions for you as a mechanical
engineer to study the vibration
of course vibration we saw that they are undesirable
however some idea of vibration is used in
positive sense in some industrial application
for example if we have vibratory conveyors
we have hoppers sieves washing machines they
function they use the concept of vibration
ok and vibration can be used in some machining
processes to improve the products to improve
the efficiency of the operation
so we have studied some basics now again we
come back to the periodic motion because we
said that vibration is a repetitive motion
and that repetition can be periodic or random
so again we come to periodic motion and i
said that periodic motion is a motion that
repeats itself after a fixed interval of time
so and we can see that that fixed interval
is known as time period and reciprocal of
that is known as frequency and frequency is
the number of cycles per unit of time
so here we can see this is the time period
because that motion is going to repeat itself
after t here it is the time period because
this complete motion this is going to repeat
itself and here this is the time period because
it is going to repeat itself now we discuss
a case of that of periodic motion that is
simple harmonic motion so of course simple
harmonic motion is a periodic motion also
because it also repeats itself after a fixed
interval of time
however there is some additional features
that additional features are that the acceleration
is always proportional to the distance from
the mean position the acceleration is proportional
to the distance from the mean position and
it is always directed to the mean position
so a simple harmonic motion can be defined
as a motion when a particle is moving on a
circle the perpendicular on a diameter so
a particle is moving on a circle with a constant
angular velocity
so if we draw a perpendicular on a diameter
and we observe the motion of that perpendicular
that motion is simple harmonic motion
for example here we can see we have so this
is a simple harmonic motion and that comes
because here we have a particle if it is moving
on a circle we draw a perpendicular here or
here so we see we draw perpendicular and so
the perpendicular is moving in this way
and we can see here more clearly
so we have here the circle the point p that
is moving here so if we draw so we can have
here
so this is a circle and a point p that is
moving here with omega and constant angular
velocity this is theta equal to omega t this
is t equal to zero so if we draw a perpendicular
here so this is if it is o and this is A this
is B this is N so oN equal to oB sin theta
and oB is the radius R so that is R and theta
is omega t so R sin omega t if you say this
is y then y equal to R sin omega t and this
is a harmonic motion simple harmonic motion
so we can say if it is this is A then this
is A so A sin omega t now if we differentiate
y dot that is A omega into cos omega t and
y double dot equal to A omega square sin omega
t minus so we can say equal to minus omega
square into A sin omega t is y so y so this
is what the acceleration is inversely proportion
is proprotional to the displacement and with
minus sign so that is the property of the
simple harmonic motion
so the time period is 2 pi by omega and frequency
is omega by 2 pi where omega is angular frequency
now we have degree of freedom so a system
is set to have n degree of freedom if it needs
n independent coordinates to specify completes
its configuration at any instant of time so
for example here we have this pendulum and
this pendulum although this is x and this
is y but they can be represented in terms
of theta so theta is the only degree of freedom
that can express its position of this mass
at any instant of time
here this is single degree of freedom system
because it needs one degree of freedom mass
that is moving in x direction this is angular
degree of freedom because only the rotation
here we have two masses moving in x direction
so each mass needs one degree of freedom so
this is the two degree of freedom system the
system needs two degree of freedom
so vibrating system what are the elements
of vibrating system so vibrating system as
i said that mechanical system that is prone
to vibration if it has mass and stiffness
so the function of mass is to store the kinetic
energy and the function of spring is to store
the potential energy and during vibration
there is the exchange of these two energies
however there is another element that is called
damping element so the damping element it
dissipates the energy
so if a system wants to maintain its vibration
it needs some external force so that its vibration
could be retained otherwise due to the effect
of damping the vibration amplitude will decay
with the time so there are the damping is
the resistance to the motion of the vibrating
object and it dissipates the energy so there
are basically three elements of mechanical
system that is mass stiffness or a spring
and damper
so vibration is classified in two types of
course the classification can be made in several
ways but here the free vibration and forced
vibration they are mainly classified because
they are different types of vibrations so
what is free vibration so free vibration it
says it means there is no force so if we disturb
a system by pulling it of a small amount and
we leave it then the system will start vibrating
and that is known as free vibration
and that frequency of that vibration is the
natural frequency of the vibration however
if there is some external force applied on
the system and the system is vibrating due
to the effect of the under the effect of that
force that is forced vibration and in the
long run or in the steady stage the system
will vibrate with the same frequency as of
the external force
so here are some examples of the free vibration
i mean we disturb this woof in the water and
it will come up and down this pendulum we
disturb we pull it little theta then we leave
it then it will start vibrating and it will
vibrate with its natural frequency there is
some string if we pull a string it will beat
and if we leave it it will vibrate these are
all examples of free vibrations however here
are some motors and fans they are subjected
to some unbalanced forces and so they are
they vibrate under those forces and they are
forced vibration case
now there is also another type of classification
known as undamped and damped vibration so
undamped means there is no damping or damping
is zero there is only mass and stiffness component
and so there is no loss of energy in the system
however damp vibration there is damping elements
so there will be the loss of dissipation of
energy
as we said that at resonance condition the
vibration is very excessive of a system
therefore to reduce that large amplitude vibration
we need damping to bring that amplitude in
some lower range so the role of damping is
quite important then there are some linear
and nonlinear vibrations so linear vibration
means this behavior of dampers spring that
is linear they behave in a linear way and
we can the differential equation that is formed
that is a linear differential equation
however if stiffness is nonlinear or damping
is nonlinear so we the differential equations
will be nonlinear differential equation and
these vibrations are termed as nonlinear vibrations
so in case of linear vibration the principle
of super position holds and we can take advantage
of that therefore the linear systems are simpler
analysis than the nonlinear systems so this
is all about the introduction on the vibrations
i thank you for attending this lecture and
see you in the next lecture